Editorial review: Document <dialog> closeby attribute (#39082)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/html/reference/elements/dialog/index.md

> [!WARNING]
> The `tabindex` attribute must not be used on the `<dialog>` element. See [usage notes](#usage_notes).

- `closedby`

  - : Specifies the types of user actions that can be used to close the `<dialog>` element. Possible values are:

>     - `none`

Author: I've updated this to alphabetical order as requested, but this then prompted me to go down a bit of a restructuring rabbit hole. I've now included the explanations of all the closing options inside the `any` value definition, and then just named the subset of the closing options allowed by the other two values.

This seems to make more structural sense, but it makes the section a bit top-heavy. Let me know what you think.

>     - `none`

Author: OK, done.

>       - : No user actions can be used to close the `<dialog>` element, only developer-specified mechanisms such as a JavaScript-powered "Close" {{htmlelement("button")}} or a {{htmlelement("form")}} submission.

Reviewer: Same comments as above here and below.

Author: All done.

Author: Let me know if you think this PR needs anything else.

Reviewer: Thanks! LGTM!

Author: Great, thanks @mfreed7!

>       - : No user actions can be used to close the `<dialog>` element, only developer-specified mechanisms such as a close {{htmlelement("button")}} (for example with a [`click`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Element/click_event) handler that invokes {{domxref("HTMLDialogElement.close()")}}) or a {{htmlelement("form")}} submission.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - : No user actions can be used to close the `<dialog>` element, only developer-specified mechanisms such as a {{htmlelement("button")}} with a [`click`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Element/click_event) handler that invokes {{domxref("HTMLDialogElement.close()")}}) or a {{htmlelement("form")}} submission.
```

(I think "close button" is an unneeded extra level of abstraction here.)

Author: Yup, agreed - simpler is always better. Updated on both pages.

    - `closerequest`

      - : The `<dialog>` element can be closed via relevant platform-specific user actions, such as pressing the <kbd>Esc</kbd> key on desktop platforms, or a "back" or "dismiss" gesture on mobile platforms.

    - `any`

      - : The `<dialog>` element can be closed via relevant platform-specific user actions, or by clicking or tapping outside the `<dialog>`. This is equivalent to the ["light dismiss" behavior of "auto" state popovers](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API/Using#auto_state_and_light_dismiss).

    > [!NOTE]

>     > If the `<dialog>` element does not have a `closedby` value specified, or it is specified with an invalid value, it behaves as if the value was `"closerequest"` if the `<dialog>` was shown via {{domxref("HTMLDialogElement.showModal()", "showModal()")}}, or `"none"` if it was not.

Author: This is much nicer, thank you! Updated on both pages.

> [!WARNING]
> The `tabindex` attribute must not be used on the `<dialog>` element. See [usage notes](#usage_notes).

- `closedby`

  - : Specifies the types of user actions that can be used to close the `<dialog>` element. Possible values are:

    - `any`

      - : The `<dialog>` element can be closed by:

>         - Clicking or tapping outside the `<dialog>`.

Reviewer 3: move the rest to "closerequest" and here say something like "Clicking or tapping outside the `<dialog>` or any `closeRequest` method.`

Author: changed

>         - Relevant platform-specific user actions such as pressing the <kbd>Esc</kbd> key on desktop platforms, or a "back" or "dismiss" gesture on mobile platforms.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        - Activating the <kbd>Esc</kbd> key on desktop platforms
        - Making the "back" or "dismiss" gesture on mobile platforms.
```

Author: the structure changed here anyway

>         - Developer-specified mechanisms such as a {{htmlelement("button")}} with a [`click`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Element/click_event) handler that invokes {{domxref("HTMLDialogElement.close()")}} or a {{htmlelement("form")}} submission.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        - Event handlers or other developer-specified mechanisms that invoke a {{domxref("HTMLDialogElement.close()")}}
        - Event handlers or other developer-specified mechanisms that invoke a  {{htmlelement("form")}} submission.
```

Author: same as above comment

>         This is equivalent to the ["light dismiss" behavior of "auto" state popovers](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API/Using#auto_state_and_light_dismiss).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
This over complicates things for this page. html element pages are lower level than API pages.

    - `closerequest`

>       - : The `<dialog>` element can be closed via relevant platform-specific user actions or developer-specified mechanisms.

Reviewer 3: see comment under "any"

>       - : The `<dialog>` element can be closed via relevant platform-specific user actions or developer-specified mechanisms.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      - : The `<dialog>` element can be closed via relevant platform-specific user actions or developer-specified mechanisms. This is the default for dialogs opened via the {{domxref("HTMLDialogElement.showModal()", "showModal()")}} function.
```

    - `none`

>       - : The `<dialog>` element can only be closed via developer-specified mechanisms.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      - : The `<dialog>` element can only be closed via an event handlers or other developer-specified mechanisms that invokes a {{domxref("HTMLDialogElement.close()")}} or a {{htmlelement("form")}} submission. This is the default for dialogs that were opened via the element's `open` attribute or by invoking the {{domxref("HTMLDialogElement.show()")}} function.

```

>     If the `<dialog>` element does not have a valid `closedby` value specified, then
> 
>     - if it was opened using {{domxref("HTMLDialogElement.showModal()", "showModal()")}}, it behaves as if the value was `"closerequest"`
>     - otherwise, it behaves as if the value was `"none"`.
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

From the output, we see it is impossible to close the dialog using the _Normal close_ button. But the dialog can be closed if we bypass the form validation using the `formnovalidate` attribute on the _Cancel_ button. Programmatically, `dialog.close()` will also close such dialog.

### Comparison of different closedby behaviors

This example demonstrates the difference in behavior between different values of the [`closedby`](#closedby) attribute.

#### HTML

> We provide three {{htmlelement("button")}} elements and three {{htmlelement("dialog")}} elements. Each button will be programmed to open a different dialog that demonstrates the behavior one of the three values of the `closedby` attribute — `none`, `closedby`, and `any`. Note that each `<dialog>` element contains a `<button>` element that will be used to close it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We provide three {{htmlelement("button")}} elements and three `<dialog>` elements. Each button will be programmed to open a different dialog that demonstrates the behavior of one of the three values of the `closedby` attribute — `none`, `closerequest`, and `any`. Note that each `<dialog>` element contains a `<button>` element that will be used to close it.
```

Author: Good catch - fixed!

```js live-sample___closedbyvalues
const noneBtn = document.getElementById("none-btn");
const closerequestBtn = document.getElementById("closerequest-btn");
const anyBtn = document.getElementById("any-btn");

const noneDialog = document.querySelector("[closedby='none']");
const closerequestDialog = document.querySelector("[closedby='closerequest']");
const anyDialog = document.querySelector("[closedby='any']");

const closeBtns = document.querySelectorAll(".close");

noneBtn.addEventListener("click", () => {
  noneDialog.showModal();
});

closerequestBtn.addEventListener("click", () => {
  closerequestDialog.showModal();
});

anyBtn.addEventListener("click", () => {
  anyDialog.showModal();
});

closeBtns.forEach((btn) => {
  btn.addEventListener("click", () => {
    btn.parentElement.close();
  });
});
```

#### Result

The rendered result is as follows:

> {{EmbedLiveSample("closedby-values", "100%", 300)}}

Reviewer 2: very nice example

Author: Cheers gun'vor

> Try clicking each button to open a dialog. The first one can only be closed by clicking its "Close" button. The second one can also be closed via a device specific user action such as pressing the <kbd>Esc</kbd> key. The third one has full ["light-dismiss" behavior](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API/Using#auto_state_and_light_dismiss), and can additionally be closed by clicking or tapping outside the dialog.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Try clicking each button to open a dialog. The first one can only be closed by clicking its "Close" button. The second one can also be closed via a device specific user action such as pressing the <kbd>Esc</kbd> key. The third one has full ["light-dismiss" behavior](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API/Using#auto_state_and_light_dismiss), so it can also be closed by clicking or tapping outside the dialog.
```

(mostly "and"->"so", or it's ambiguous whether "close by clicking outside" is additional to "light-dismiss" rather than constituitive of it)

Author: Makes sense; updated.

From the output, we see it is impossible to close the dialog using the _Normal close_ button. But the dialog can be closed if we bypass the form validation using the `formnovalidate` attribute on the _Cancel_ button. Programmatically, `dialog.close()` will also close such dialog.

> ### Comparison of different closedby behaviors

Reviewer 3: add a comment on a few of the examples that says something to the effect of "While not declared, in this case the `closeBy` attribute defaulted to `closeRequest` because the dialog was opened with the `showModal()` function."

Author: I don't think this is needed
